[DOCS] 8.0.0 Release Notes (#1492)
elastic/security-docs: docs/release-notes/8.0.asciidoc

----

*Existing or new rules that use the legacy alerts index may temporarily fail after upgrading*

After you upgrade to {stack} version 8.0.0, existing and new rules might fail to execute  if their source index is configured to use a legacy alert index pattern created in {stack} version 7.x (`.siem-signals-<space-id>`). Rule failures will likely cause detection gaps, which will be proportional in time to the scheduled interval of the rule. Rules will start to successfully execute after legacy alerts are no longer within the scheduled time period queried by the rule. Despite this automatic correction, coverage gaps might still remain ({pull}124327[#124327]).

*The Threat Intel Filebeat Module (v8.x) Indicator Match rule query is misconfigured*

The indicator index query of the rule is misconfigured and will prevent the rule from generating alerts ({pull}121045[#121045], {pull}1560[#1560]). To resolve this, duplicate the rule and update its settings:

. Go to the Rules table (*Detect -> Rules ->*.

> . Locate the Threat Intel Filebeat Module (v8.x) Indicator Match pre-built rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Locate the Threat Intel Filebeat Module (v8.x) Indicator Match prebuilt rule.
```

+
TIP: You can search for the rule by entering the rule name in the Rule table's search bar.

. Click the rule to view the rule details.
. Click the actions menu, then click *Duplicate rule*.
. Go to the *Indicator index query* field and update the query by removing `event.dataset:ti_*` and replacing it with `event.module:threatintel`. For reference, the correct query is:

+
[code block]
----

> `@timestamp >= "now-30d" and event.dataset: threatintel and (threat.indicator.file.hash.*:* or threat.indicator.file.pe.imphash:* or threat.indicator.ip:* or threat.indicator.registry.path:* or threat.indicator.url.full:*)`

Reviewer 2: `event.dataset: threatintel` -> `event.module: threatintel`

. Click the message to open it, then click *Quick resolve*.
. Refresh the page to verify the deprecation was resolved, then return to the guided steps on the Upgrade Assistant page.

[discrete]
[[new-features-8.0.0]]
==== Features
* Shows all historical alerts for a given rule on the rule details page, including those associated with previous versions of the rule ({pull}120053[#120053]).
* Enhances the UI and functionality for the Rules and Rule Monitoring tables and enables actions on the Rule Monitoring table ({pull}119644[#119644]).
* The Threat Intelligence view supports {agent}, {filebeat}, and custom integrations ({pull}116175[#116175]).
* Allows exception lists to be exported and imported with detection rules ({pull}115144[#115144], {pull}118816[#118816]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.0.0]]
==== Bug fixes and enhancements
* Enhances the UI for the Exceptions table; improves how dates are displayed in the Rules and Exceptions tables ({pull}117643[#117643], {pull}118940[#118940]).
* Updates the mappings of the rule registry to ECS version 8.0.0 so that detection rules can process ECS version 8.0.0 data ({pull}123012[#123012]).

> * Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).

Reviewer 3: Or:
```suggestion
* Uses Data Views to query instead of index pattern string, allowing for the addition of runtime fields in Timeline and Alert tables ({pull}114806[#114806], {pull}117601[#117601]).
* Create a new runtime field in Timeline and Alert tables from the field browser "Create field" button ({pull}117627[#117627]).
```

> * Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).

Author: Changing to "Allows you to create and add runtime fields from the Alert and Timeline tables" as discussed with @stephmilovic in Slack.

[[release-notes-header-8.0.0]]
== 8.0

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.0.0]]
=== 8.0.0

[discrete]
[[post-upgrade-reqs-8.0.0]]

> ==== Post upgrade requirements

Reviewer: Not sure if there's a team/Elastic guideline, but in general I'd hyphenate this, since it's acting as an adjective.
```suggestion
==== Post-upgrade requirements
```

Author: Yeah, I was following the way it was written in the [7.10 RN](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/7.13/release-notes.html#release-notes-7.10.0), but then realized we hyphenate it in our main docset (see https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/master/post-upgrade-intro.html), so I agree with this edit.

> * Changes to the indicator match rule's default threat indicator path (<<rule-ui-advanced-params, *Indicator prefix override*>>) might require you to update existing rules, or create new ones, after upgrading to {stack} version 8.0.0. Be mindful of the following ({pull}118821[#118821]):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Changes to the indicator match rule's default threat indicator path (<<rule-ui-advanced-params, *Indicator prefix override*>>) might require you to update existing rules, or create new ones, after upgrading to {stack} version 8.0.0 ({pull}118821[#118821]). Be mindful of the following:
```

Reviewer: Commas around "or create new ones" seem unnecessary and break up the sentence's flow.

> ** If an indicator match rule's default threat indicator path was not defined before upgrading, it will receive the default value `threatintel.indicator` during the upgrade process. This allows the rule to continue using indicator data ingested by {filebeat} version 7.x. If a custom value was defined before the upgrade, the value remains the same.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
** If an indicator match rule's default threat indicator path was not defined before the upgrade, it will default to `threatintel.indicator` after the upgrade. This allows the rule to continue using indicator data ingested by {filebeat} version 7.x. If a custom value was defined before the upgrade, it will not change.
```

> ** If an existing indicator match rule was configured to use threat indicator indices generated from {filebeat} version 7.x, updating the default threat indicator path to `threat.indicator` after you upgrade to {stack} version 8.0.0 and {agent} or {filebeat} version 8.0.0 configures the rule to use threat indicator indices generated by {agent} or {filebeat} version 8.0.0.

Reviewer: Ignore if you feel this loses necessary specificity, but I was trying to avoid repetition:
```suggestion
** If an existing indicator match rule was configured to use threat indicator indices generated from {filebeat} version 7.x, updating the default threat indicator path to `threat.indicator` after you upgrade to {stack} version 8.0.0 and {agent} or {filebeat} version 8.0.0 configures the rule to use threat indicator indices generated by those later versions.
```

Author: I don't think this change detracts from the intended message. It's also easier to read, so no objections to your suggestion.

> ** Separate rules must be created to query threat intelligence indices created by {filebeat} version 7.x and version 8.0.0 because different default threat indicator path values are required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
** You must create separate rules to query threat intelligence indices created by {filebeat} versions 7.x and 8.0.0 because each major version requires different default threat indicator path values.
```

Author: I'm not sure that it'd be accurate to say that each major version requires a different default value, but I think I get what you're conveying with this suggestion. How about:
 
 You must create separate rules to query threat intelligence indices created by {filebeat} versions 7.x and 8.0.0 because each version requires different default threat indicator path values.

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.0.0]]
==== Breaking Changes
* Removes the trusted application API. The trusted application interface maintains identical functionality but now uses the exception list API ({pull}120134[#120134]).
* Removes the list endpoint metadata API ({pull}119401[#119401]).

[discrete]
[[new-features-8.0.0]]
==== Features
* Shows all historical alerts for a given rule in Rule Details, including those associated with previous versions of the rule ({pull}120053[#120053]).
* Improves the Rules and Rule Monitoring tables and enables actions on the Rule Monitoring table ({pull}119644[#119644]).
* The Threat Intelligence view supports {agent}, {filebeat}, and custom integrations ({pull}116175[#116175]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.0.0]]
==== Bug fixes and enhancements
* Redesigns and improves the Rules and Exceptions tables ({pull}118940[#118940]).
* Updates the mappings of the rule registry to ECS version 8.0.0, so that the detection rules can process ECS version 8.0.0 data ({pull}123012[#123012]).
* Updates rule import functionality to include exceptions ({pull}118816[#118816]).

> * Improves how dates are displayed in the Rules and Exceptions tables ({pull}117643[#117643]).

Reviewer: Move up to follow line 32, since they're both about Rules and Exceptions tables?

Author: @vitaliidm if you're onboard with merging the summaries for https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/117643 and https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/118940, we can do that :)

Reviewer 5: thank you @nastasha-solomon , please go ahead with merge

Author: Will do, thanks!

* Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to, the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).

> * Enhances the *Data view* selection modal’s UI, and hides the *Data view* dropdown when no data is present ({pull}117601[#117601], {pull}119956[#119956]).

Reviewer: Omit bold, since we're not directing the reader to interact with these UI elements.

* Changes the insufficient permissions message type from an error to a warning ({pull}123777[#123777]).
* Fixes typos in the success messages that appear after you close Timelines or Timeline templates ({pull}123258[#123258]).
* Updates the Exceptions table header and the export icon ({pull}122870[#122870]).
* Fixes a bug that could break a rule’s details page after you edited, activated, or deactivated the rule ({pull}122024[#122024]).
* Fixes overlap between the rule query text field and Timeline banner ({pull}121967[#121967], {pull}121127[#121127]).
* Adds support for the threat feed name field (`threat.feed.name`) in the alert details flyout and Timeline view ({pull}120250[#120250]).
* Adds the default threat indicator path (`threat_indicator_path`) to indicator match rules where it was missing ({pull}118962[#118962]).
* Adds a default value for the threat indicator path that indicator match rules use when creating indicator match rules from the {es-sec-app} UI or the create rule API ({pull}118821[#118821]).
* Enhances the design of the Endpoint details flyout ({pull}117987[#117987]).

> * Fixes a bug that prevented you from clearing a connector’s *Additional comments* field ({pull}117901[#117901]).

Reviewer: Same as above, omit bold.

. Open the main menu and click *Management -> Stack Management -> Stack -> Upgrade Assistant*.
. From the Upgrade Assistant page, review the Kibana deprecation warnings. You will find a warning prompting you to update role privileges because of changes to the {elastic-sec} Cases feature.
. Click the warning to open it, then click *Quick resolve*.
. Refresh the page to verify the deprecation was resolved, then return to the guided steps on the Upgrade Assistant page.

[discrete]
[[new-features-8.0.0]]
==== Features
* Shows all historical alerts for a given rule in Rule Details, including those associated with previous versions of the rule ({pull}120053[#120053]).
* Improves the Rules and Rule Monitoring tables and enables actions on the Rule Monitoring table ({pull}119644[#119644]).
* The Threat Intelligence view supports {agent}, {filebeat}, and custom integrations ({pull}116175[#116175]).
* Allows exception lists to be exported and imported with detection rules ({pull}115144[#115144], {pull}118816[#118816]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.0.0]]
==== Bug fixes and enhancements

> * Improves how dates are displayed in the Rules and Exceptions tables and introduces additional redesigns and improvements to the Rules and Exceptions tables ({pull}117643[#117643], {pull}118940[#118940]).

Reviewer 6: On line 46 the enhancement to the Rules table UI was mentioned. 

```suggestion
* Enhances the UI for the Exceptions table; improves how dates are displayed in the Rules and Exceptions tables ({pull}117643[#117643], {pull}118940[#118940]).
```

> * Updates the mappings of the rule registry to ECS version 8.0.0, so that the detection rules can process ECS version 8.0.0 data ({pull}123012[#123012]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Updates the mappings of the rule registry to ECS version 8.0.0 so that detection rules can process ECS version 8.0.0 data ({pull}123012[#123012]).
```

> * Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to, the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).
```

> * Enhances the Data view selection modal’s UI, and hides the Data view dropdown when no data is present ({pull}117601[#117601], {pull}119956[#119956]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Enhances the Data view selection UI and hides the Data view dropdown when no data is present ({pull}117601[#117601], {pull}119956[#119956]).
```

* Enhances previews and error flagging during rule creation ({pull}116374[#116374]).
* Updates rule actions to use `kibana.alert.*` fields instead of `signals.*` fields ({pull}116491[#116491]).
* Changes the insufficient permissions message type from an error to a warning ({pull}123777[#123777]).
* Fixes typos in the success messages that appear after you close Timelines or Timeline templates ({pull}123258[#123258]).

> * Updates the Exceptions table header and the export icon ({pull}122870[#122870]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Updates the Exceptions table header and Export button ({pull}122870[#122870]).
```

* Fixes a bug that could break a rule’s details page after you edited, activated, or deactivated the rule ({pull}122024[#122024]).

> * Fixes overlap between the rule query text field and Timeline banner ({pull}121967[#121967], {pull}121127[#121127]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fixes an overlap between the rule query text field and Timeline banner ({pull}121967[#121967], {pull}121127[#121127]).
```

* Adds support for the threat feed name field (`threat.feed.name`) in the alert details flyout and Timeline view ({pull}120250[#120250]).
* Adds the default threat indicator path (`threat_indicator_path`) to indicator match rules where it was missing ({pull}118962[#118962]).
* Adds a default value for the threat indicator path that indicator match rules use when creating indicator match rules from the {es-sec-app} UI or the create rule API ({pull}118821[#118821]).

> * Enhances the design of the Endpoint details flyout ({pull}117987[#117987]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Enhances the Endpoint details flyout UI ({pull}117987[#117987]).
```

==== Upgrade requirements
* Rules must be manually disabled before upgrading to {stack} version 8.0.0, and then manually enabled after the process completes. Refer to [Upgrade to Elastic Security] for more information.
* To make the *Data view* option appear in an environment with legacy alerts, a user with elevated role privileges must visit the {es-sec-app}, open a page that displays alert data (such as the Overview page), then refresh the page. The user's role privileges must allow them to enable the detections feature in a Kibana space. Refer to <<enable-detections-ui, Enable and access detections>> for more information.

+
NOTE: If new alerts are generated in an upgraded environment without legacy alerts, refreshing any page with alert data in {elastic-sec} will make the *Data view* option appear in the {es-sec-ui}.

* The system index for detection alerts has been renamed from `.siem-signals-*` to `.alerts-security.alerts-*`. As such, the schema used for alert documents in {elastic-sec} has changed. Users that access documents in the `.siem-signals` indices will be able to modify their API queries and scripts to operate properly on the new 8.0 alert documents.

> * To view alerts, users need manage, `write`, `read`, and `view_index_metadata` privileges to two new indices, `.alerts-security.alerts` and `.internal.alerts-security.alerts`. Existing users who are upgrading to 8.0 can retain their privileges to the `.siem-signals` index. Refer to <<detections-permissions-section>> for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To view alerts, users need `manage`, `write`, `read`, and `view_index_metadata` privileges to two new indices, `.alerts-security.alerts` and `.internal.alerts-security.alerts`. Existing users who are upgrading to 8.0 can retain their privileges to the `.siem-signals` index. Refer to <<detections-permissions-section>> for more information.
```

* Updates the mappings of the rule registry to ECS version 8.0.0 so that detection rules can process ECS version 8.0.0 data ({pull}123012[#123012]).
* Allows you to create runtime fields from, and add them to the Alerts and Timeline tables ({pull}117627[#117627], {pull}114806[#114806]).
* Enhances the Data view selection UI and hides the Data view dropdown when no data is present ({pull}117601[#117601], {pull}119956[#119956]).
* Enhances previews and error flagging during rule creation ({pull}116374[#116374]).
* Updates rule actions to use `kibana.alert.*` fields instead of `signals.*` fields ({pull}116491[#116491]).
* Changes the insufficient permissions message type from an error to a warning ({pull}123777[#123777]).
* Fixes typos in the success messages that appear after you close Timelines or Timeline templates ({pull}123258[#123258]).
* Updates the Exceptions table header and Export button ({pull}122870[#122870]).
* Fixes a bug that could break a rule’s details page after you edited, activated, or deactivated the rule ({pull}122024[#122024]).
* Fixes an overlap between the rule query text field and Timeline banner ({pull}121967[#121967], {pull}121127[#121127]).

> * Adds support for the threat feed name field (`threat.feed.name`) in the alert details flyout and Timeline view ({pull}120250[#120250]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds support for the `threat.feed.name` field in the alert details flyout and Timeline view ({pull}120250[#120250]).
```

[[release-notes-header-8.0.0]]
== 8.0

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.0.0]]
=== 8.0.0

[discrete]
[[known-issues-8.0.0]]
==== Known issues
*Case migration errors might be logged when upgrading*

You might find the `Failed to migrate user action alerts` error message in your {kib} migration logs when upgrading to {stack} version 8.0.0. This error is incorrectly logged when migrating cases and can be ignored ({pull}124950[#124950]).

Here is an example of an error message you might encounter:

[code block]
----
[2022-02-07T20:25:58.614+00:00][ERROR][savedobjects-service] Failed to migrate user action alerts with doc id: 7420fe08-c2ed-51d2-b077-46deb4bf76c9 version: 8.0.0 error: Unexpected token in JSON at position 0
----

*Existing or new rules that use the legacy alerts index may temporarily fail after upgrading*

> After you upgrade to {stack} version 8.0.0, existing and new rules might fail to execute  if their source index is configured to use a legacy alert index pattern created in {stack} version 7.x (`.siem-signals-<space-id>`). Rule failures will likely cause coverage gaps, which will be proportional in time to the scheduled interval of the rule. Rules will start to successfully execute after legacy alerts are no longer within the scheduled time period queried by the rule. Despite this automatic correction, coverage gaps (up to about a minute interval) might still remain ({pull}124327[#124327]).

Reviewer 7: Suggestions in **_bold italic:_** 

After you upgrade to {stack} version 8.0.0, existing and new rules might fail to execute  if their source index is configured to use a legacy alert index pattern created in {stack} version 7.x (`.siem-signals-<space-id>`). Rule failures will likely cause **_detection_** coverage gaps, which will be proportional in time to the scheduled interval of the rule. Rules will start to successfully execute after legacy alerts are no longer within the scheduled time period queried by the rule. Despite this automatic correction, coverage gaps **_~~(up to about a minute interval)~~_** might still remain ({pull}124327[#124327]).

[discrete]
[[upgrade-reqs-8.0.0]]
==== Upgrade requirements

> * Rules must be manually disabled before upgrading to {stack} version 8.0.0, and then manually enabled after the process completes. Refer to [Upgrade to Elastic Security] for more information.

Reviewer 7: Is there a "why" or "what happens if I don't disable them first?" that we could add?

* To make the *Data view* option appear in an environment with legacy alerts, a user with elevated role privileges must visit the {es-sec-app}, open a page that displays alert data (such as the Overview page), then refresh the page. The user's role privileges must allow them to enable the detections feature in a Kibana space. Refer to <<enable-detections-ui, Enable and access detections>> for more information.

+
NOTE: If new alerts are generated in an upgraded environment without legacy alerts, refreshing any page with alert data in {elastic-sec} will make the *Data view* option appear in the {es-sec-ui}.

> * The system index for detection alerts has been renamed from `.siem-signals-*` to `.alerts-security.alerts-*`. As such, the schema used for alert documents in {elastic-sec} has changed. Users that access documents in the `.siem-signals` indices will be able to modify their API queries and scripts to operate properly on the new 8.0 alert documents.

Reviewer 7: Suggestions in **_bold italics:_**
* The system index for detection alerts has been renamed from `.siem-signals-*` to `.alerts-security.alerts-*` **_and is now a hidden index_**. As such, the schema used for alert documents in {elastic-sec} has changed. Users that access documents in the `.siem-signals` indices **_via API_** ~~will be able to~~ **_must_** modify their API queries and scripts to operate properly on the new 8.0 alert documents.   **_The new schema is here {link to new schema doc section}._**
